This record relates to the siege of Duncannon Fort which took place between 25 January and 18 March 1645. It was investigated in the course of the Irish Battlefields Project as having the potential to be interpreted as a ‘battle’. The evidence – as set out in the following summary account – was considered sufficient to warrant accepting it as a siege only and did not satisfy the project’s criteria for a ‘battle’ (SMR file).

Duncannon was one of a number of strategically important coastal fortifications in Ireland. Situated half-way between the town of New Ross and Hook Head it was a vital stronghold during the Confederate Wars (1641–1652) offering potential control of a major channel of communication between Waterford port (and by extension New Ross) and Continental Europe. Begun in 1587 the fort went through various episodes of construction and neglect over the ensuing fifty years and at the time of the outbreak of the rebellion in Ulster, in October 1641, it was ill-equipped. Commanded by the veteran soldier, Sir Laurence Esmonde, the fort suffered from a shortage of soldiers, provisions and munitions. Recognising the difficult situation Esmonde at first adopted a restrained attitude towards the insurgents until reinforcements arrived in early 1642. It was at this time that an intermittent siege of the fort was undertaken but, apart from various skirmishes and raids involving the soldiers and insurgents, the latter were unsuccessful in their attempts to take the fort. The decision to besiege it appears largely to have been a reaction to the marauding raids by the garrison into the countryside seeking prey and other supplies (Murphy 2012).

By its very location, Duncannon Fort had several naturally occurring defensive features. Situated on a narrow rocky peninsula, the sea provided a natural defence on the north-west, west and south. Access from the mainland to the peninsula was restricted by building a moat and erecting storm poles. The fort had an inner curtain wall defended by three mural towers. Beyond this to the east was an outer wall with a strong, well-fortified gate and a rampart 24 feet thick. The gate also had a drawbridge, which could be retracted during a siege. Beyond this rampart there were further defences that included a redoubt, two strong outworks and another triangular-shaped defensive structure. The fort, however, was overlooked by higher ground which would give considerable advantage to any would-be aggressor especially if it possessed artillery. Of particular concern was the fact that there was no reliable water supply within the fort, and the garrison had to fetch water from a well outside its walls.

Given its strategic location it was evident that the Confederates would not leave Duncannon unchallenged and when the English garrison at Cork under Lord Inchiquin decided to declare for Parliament in 1644, Esmonde followed suit under pressure from his own. From early autumn 1644, Parliamentary ships were using the fort as a base for operations against Confederate shipping and attacks on the surrounding countryside were also stepped up. As a result the Confederation of Kilkenny determined to try and capture it and the task was entrusted to General Thomas Preston, commander of the Leinster army. Contemporary sources are not in agreement as to the exact numbers of troops at his command but there is a general consensus that he had approximately 1,500 infantry soldiers and large number of ordnance including mortars. Crucially, Preston’s force included an experienced French siege engineer, Nicholas La Loue, who had served with him in Flanders. Within Duncannon Fort the pro-government garrison consisted of c. 150 men. The fort was well equipped with 22 artillery pieces and was supported by the parliamentary squadron of four ships which lay anchored off Duncannon. These ensured that some supplies could be brought to the fort and at least 38 men from the fleet were sent to assist in its defence.

The Confederate army established their camp to the north-east of Duncannon, in a valley behind the high ground that overlooked the fort. Preston set up his headquarters near a chapel and graveyard to the north-east of the fort, and La Loue established his personal headquarters near a battery overlooking Waterford harbour to the north. At the commencement of the siege on 25 January 1646 the Confederate forces took possession of a ruined windmill on a height to the east of the fort. On the following day they began firing from a battery at the ships in the harbour and three of the four managed to cut their cables and sail out to sea. The flagship, the Great Lewis, however, which was caught in an unfavourable tide and wind, was prevented from moving off and it was severed damaged. With broken masts it drifted out of range but was so seriously impaired that it sank and most of its crew perished. In 2002 a wreck was located on Duncannon Bar, the remains of which are considered to be those of the Great Lewis (Kelleher 2006).

Over the course of the following days the Confederates rapidly erected batteries for both cannon and mortars and set to work to construct a trench network, intended to protect these batteries and to link them together. His engineers also constructed covered approaches which brought the Confederates within 400 yards (365m) of the fort. The Confederate artillery batteries were positioned to command both the land-side of the fort and the sea approaches. Many of these were located in what is now the present-day village of Duncannon. Other batteries were located on the high ground to the north and east of the fort. From the outset the Parliamentary ships attempted to use their artillery to drive the engineers from their works but these did little damage as few of their shots came close to reaching the besiegers. From the fort, the garrison likewise made frequent sallies against the Confederates but were repulsed on each occasion.

The position of the besieged garrison deteriorated and, despite their avowed loyalties, little by way of assistance was provided to them from the Parliament forces in Ireland or England. Approximately three weeks into the siege Lord Inchiquin managed to get a message to Esmonde stating that he could not come to his relief unless further assistance arrived from England. About the same time, Esmonde learned from Admiral Swanley in England, that a collier would be sent to provide the garrison with fuel, but that no significant assistance could otherwise be provided.

On 11 February Preston commenced a heavy cannonade of the fort. Afterwards, he called on the commander to surrender but the herald who brought this message to the fort was himself fired on by the garrison. In the wake of this refusal Preston reportedly fired an arrow into the fort with a message tied to it informing the defenders that any future terms of surrender offered the garrison would not be as generous as those that the herald had carried. The Confederates renewed their bombardment and continued with no let-up until mid-March. The defenders responded by firing on the besiegers’ lines with cannon-shot. On 19 February five Parliamentary ships anchored beyond the range of the Confederate cannon in full view of Duncannon Fort and, under cover of darkness, used their longboats to send supplies to the fort.

By 26 February the Confederates had come sufficiently close to the fort to attempt an assault. Preston placed 500 musketeers in the trenches to drive off the besieged during the attack and forced those in the outworks to retreat into the fort. The attack, however, was not a success as a strong wind cause problems for the lighted match, thus rendering the muskets unserviceable. The musketeers suffered many casualties and were eventually beaten off by the defenders. In the wake of this failed assault Preston continued the bombardment. Inside the fort the garrison’s position was becoming increasingly critical. The lack of fresh water was becoming particularly problematic and, although there was heavy rainfall, the defenders do not seem to have been able to collect sufficient rainwater for their needs. In addition, the garrison lacked a surgeon so that the injured lay untreated inside the fort.

On 1 March Preston again called on the garrison to surrender but Esmonde refused. To add to the difficulties being experienced by the garrison a storm blew the roofs off all the buildings inside the fort three days later and the high winds also forced the parliamentary ships to temporarily put to sea. By 8 March the sappers had undermined the fort’s defences in three places and Confederate soldiers were almost under the ramparts. At this juncture Esmonde made a last ditch appeal for assistance to Inchiquin and to Vice-Admiral Smith who was with the Parliamentary ships in the bay. Again, Inchiquin replied that he could provide no aid at this time and Smith, who was also short of supplies, advised Esmonde to surrender on the best terms he could negotiate. Shortly afterwards, Smith sailed away with the five Parliamentary ships.

Preston again called on the garrison to surrender on 11 March. Esmonde, however, began to play for time and, two days later he wrote to Preston declaring that he held Duncannon Fort for Charles I and would not surrender without direct orders from either the King or Ormond. Tiring of these delays Preston replied on 14 March stating it was evident that Esmonde clearly held the fort for the English Parliament, citing earlier attacks by the garrison (1641–44) including those on towns held for the Royalist cause.

Two days later (16 March) the Confederates detonated a mine on the fort’s rampart intending to make a breach and carry out a second assault on the fort. However, only a sally port was destroyed by the explosion and the rampart remained relatively intact. Preston then moved his cannon forward to the moat and commenced a bombardment which destroyed a tower nearest the gate on the fort’s inner wall. A ‘forlorn of hope’ of 150 Confederate troops then stormed the breach and, despite heavy losses, managed to secure the outer defensive works. In consequence of this success and recognising that he could not hold out for much longer, Esmonde finally sued for terms.

On 18 March both sides agreed a truce to enable them bury their dead following which Esmonde and Preston arranged a parley where the terms of surrender were quickly established. Preston agreed to accept the surrender of the fort with all its war supplies and, in return, the garrison would be allowed to quit Duncannon with all their baggage and the full honours of war. From there they were to be conveyed either to Dublin or Youghal. It would appear that some of the defenders had been carrying on secret correspondence with the Confederates and some 30 of these chose to join Preston’s army. Accordingly, on 19 March 1645 – the fifty-ninth day of the siege – Esmonde’s garrison marched out of the fort and were replaced by a Confederate one. The fort was renamed “Fort Saint Patrick” by the Confederates and on 25 March high mass was celebrated there to give thanks for its capture.

The taking of Duncannon Fort was a major blow to the Parliamentary cause in its Irish theatre of war. It was not only a major propaganda success for the Confederates but, more especially, it allowed the sea route to Waterford to be reopened. In particular, it eliminated a hostile garrison in Confederate territory and secured a great deal of supplies, along with 22 pieces of ordnance. (Lenihan 2001, 164-5, 178-89; IBP Report – Duncannon)